Health insurance covers essential health, illness and accident expenses by protecting you from unexpected, high medical costs.
When you take a health insurance policy, the costs for your medical treatment during hospitalisation are covered by the insurer for the sum assured selected by you, on annual payment of the premium. 
You can either pay for the treatment yourself and have it reimbursed by the policy later, or go a network hospital for your treatment, where your costs are covered by the policy from the beginning.
In addition to this, the premium paid for the policy counts as tax deduction under Section 80D of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
Health insurance policies can be bought for an individual or for family.
They can also be bought to protect you against critical illnesses, or any issues that you may face during maternity. 
Let’s have a look at types of health insurance covers you can consider before making your buying decision.
Types of Health Insurance Policy
Individual Health Insurance Policy Under the Individual Health Insurance Policy, the chosen sum assured is applicable to a person covered under the plan on an individual basis for cashless hospitalization and other benefits. 
It is a policy where each insured member is entitled to the entire amount separately.
Family Floater Health Insurance PolicyIn the Family Floater Health Insurance policy, the chosen sum assured is applicable to all family members covered under a single cover i.e. one cover for all members. 
It can be used entirely by one member or by multiple people over multiple claims.
Top-up Health Insurance Policy The Top-up health insurance plan additional coverage for people who have limited health cover insurance under an existing individual plan or coverage from the employer. 
It is for reimbursement of expenditure which arises out of single illness when the limit of the existing cover is not sufficient.
Critical Illness Health Insurance PlansTaken as a standalone insurance policy or a rider for treatment of serious illnesses like - cancer, kidney failure, heart attack etc. 
Most critical illness Insurance policies provide for payment of a lump sum benefit if the policyholder is diagnosed, suffering from one of the specified critical illnesses.
Group/Employee Health Insurance Policy Group/employee health insurance policies are generally purchased by companies, and cover the employees of that company against costs of medical care. 
The premiums of group medical insurance plans are generally lower than average, and the coverage against diseases and medical procedures is fairly broad.
Personal Accident Covers personal accident insurance cover protects you and your family from expenses incurred as the result of an accident, in the event of death, disability, injury, and other unforeseen situations. 
Personal accident covers can be purchased independently or as a rider to an already existing policy.
Senior Citizen Health Insurance PolicySenior Citizen Health Insurance PolicySenior citizen health insurance plans can be purchased by those who are at least 60 years of age, or older. 
They are designed exclusively to help offset the expenses associated with medical care of older people. 
Such policies generally need you to undergo a medical check-up before you can avail the plan. 
However, the premium costs on them are generally lower than usual
Maternity Health InsuranceMaternity health insurance is an exclusive cover designed for pregnant women. 
It may be purchased independently, or as a rider to an existing health insurance policy. 
Maternity health insurance covers both the mother and the child against costs of pre-natal, post-natal, and hospitalisation expenses, in addition to covering complications arising due to pregnancy as well.
Features and Benefits of Health Insurance Policies in India
Comprehensive health cover insurance options from Rs.2 lakhs to Rs.50 lakhs
Cashless settlement - you need not pay any amount while hospitalized for treatment across wide network of hospitals
Ambulance fees covered
No room rent capping
Maternity benefits, including coverage of new born baby along with vaccination charges up to 10 years
30 days pre- and 60 days post-hospitalization benefits
130 daycare procedures covered
Medical expenses incurred during organ transplant
Emergency ambulance charges covered
AYUSH (Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy) treatment is also covered
Free health check-ups and discount vouchers as No Claim Bonus (NCB is an advantage provided if a person does not file a claim for any treatment in previous year).
Entry age up to 60 years
Income Tax benefit under Section 80D
No Claim Bonus on renewing the policy after every claim-free year
Loyalty discounts on premium after referring family members or friends for a similar policy under the insurer
24/7 toll-free call centre support to ensure that you can access your policy at any time
Online application and renewal to make the policy hassle-free
Ability to renew the policy lifelong, including in old age
Ability to port the insurance policy to any insurer of your choice
Eligibility for Health Insurance and Documents Required
Individuals who are at least 18 to 21 years of age can avail a health insurance policy
Dependent children can be covered under the policy between the ages of 90 days and 25 years
Senior citizens can be covered under policies tailored for them from 60 years of age onwards
Generally, health insurance policies require no documentation except the application form, accurately filled and signed.
However, you may be required to take a medical test if you are over a certain age.
Things to Consider Before You Buy Health Insurance Plans
What type of insurance policy you would want to buy, for individual or for family?
What would be the ideal insurance cover for you/your family?
What add-on features you would want to opt-in for?
Know the applicable sub limits (capping amount of expenses category like room rent, doctors’ fees, medical test cost etc.)
Policy inclusions and exclusions.
What would be likely procedures of claim? (cashless, reimbursement)
Medical check-ups required before policy acceptance?
How to Apply Applying for health insurance is easy. 
Simply fill in our online application form, and our representative will get in touch with you to take the process further, and help you select the best Health Insurance plan for your needs.
What is the procedure for change of address for medical insurance?
You can change the address by giving a request letter to the insurance company on plain paper and the insurance company will pass the endorsement and give a copy of same to you. 
Kindly remember to send same to your TPA also so that they can incorporate same in their records.
Why do I need Health Insurance?
Healthcare is expensive. 
Technological advances, new procedures and more effective medicines have driven up the cost of healthcare. 
This increase has to be borne by the consumer, making treatment unaffordable for too many.
Health Insurance overcomes these obstacles so that you remain free of anxiety regarding your health. 
Think for a moment about the enormous medical costs you would incur if you suffered a major accident tomorrow or were suddenly stricken by an illness. 
Uninsured people live with such risks every day. 
Health insurance seeks to shield you from that risk. 
It provides the much needed financial relief. 
You also get tax benefit under section 80D of the Income Tax Act.
What is Health Insurance/Mediclaim?
Health Insurance/Mediclaim is protection against medical costs. 
A health insurance policy is a contract between an insurer and an individual /group in which the insurer agrees to provide specified health insurance cover at a particular premium. 
The health insurer usually provides either direct payment (cashless facility) or reimburses the expenses associated with illnesses and injuries.
I am already having health insurance and want to increase sum insured, what should I doYou can take super top up plan and increase your sum insured to desired level.
Can a person have more than one Health policy?
Yes. But each company will pay its ratable proportion of the loss, liability, compensation, costs or expenses.
If a person has Health Insurance from company X for Rs. 1 Lac and Health Insurance from company Y for RS. 1 Lac, then in case of a claim, each policy will pay in the ratio of 50:50 up to the SI.
What is Cumulative Bonus?
An increase in the Sum insured by a specified percentage for every claim free year, subject to a certain maximum. 
An important point to be remembered is that the policy should be renewed without a break to avail of the cumulative bonus.
What are Pre-Existing Diseases?Any condition, ailment or injury or related condition(s) for which insured person had signs or symptoms and/or was diagnosed and/or received medical advice/treatment within 48 months prior to his/her health policy with the company. 
Preexisting diseases will be covered after a maximum of four years since the inception of the policy.